If you ever feel lonely, try doing something that doesn't involve people.

To be lonely is to want connection. It's to feel a void because we want to be around others. But the more we strive for connection, the more disconnected we get from others.

So, go the other way. Do something that doesn't involve human beings at all. Work on a project that's intensely detail-focused, technical or intellectual.

My current favourites are in computing and color grading, but writing is something that I also do in these states of mind.

Doing a technical or intellectual project will swing the poles the other way. Instead of chasing connection, we focus on making great leaps towards projects we care about.

In the big picture, these two poles: of connecting with other people verses doing solo work, is similar to breathing. We breathe in, then breathe out. We don't walk around all day constantly inhaling.

But if you think about loneliness, it's the opposite: it's focusing on one pole, but avoiding the other.

We tend to emphasise connection as human beings. We emphasise that human beings are social animals, and that we're better off working together than being alone.

But disconnection is just as helpful as connection. Disconnection helps us reset, think things through, recover, and ironically, can help us feel less lonely. The more we strive for connection with other people, the more we need disconnection. 

So if you're ever feeling lonely, don't worry. Take a step away from other people, and focus on something interesting, important and motivated by your own ideas.

When the time comes to connect again, you'll feel it. After a long period of solo work, connection feels natural and rewarding.

Like breathing in after a deep exhale of air.